docs(documentation): add a getting started with modsecurity guide (#1696)
Scalingo/documentation: src/_posts/platform/getting-started/2000-01-01-getting-started-with-modsecurity.md

---

> title: Getting started with ModSecurity on Scalingo

Reviewer: nitpick:

```suggestion
title: Getting Started With ModSecurity on Scalingo
```

In English, usually titles have the first letter of all words upper cased. I usually use https://capitalizemytitle.com/ with the Wiki style.

modified_at: 2022-07-25 00:00:00
tags: tutorial security firewall modsecurity apache nginx waf
index: 11
---

ModSecurity is an open-source Web Application Firewall (WAF) that allows users
to monitor, log and filter HTTP requests. A very common use case is to rely on
a set of open-source rules provided by [OWASP](https://owasp.org/) (called
[OWASP ModSecurity Core Rule Set (CRS)](https://owasp.org/www-project-modsecurity-core-rule-set/))
to protect a web application against generic classes of vulnerabilities and

> Layer 7 attacks such as SQL injections (SQLi), Cross Site Scripting (XSS), ...

Reviewer: nitpick: I wouldn't mention these acronyms as they are not used throughout the document.
```suggestion
Layer 7 attacks such as SQL injections, Cross Site Scripting...
```

> Although originally designed for the Apache HTTP Server, it has grown
> compatible with other technologies such as NGINX or Microsoft IIS, becoming a
> *de facto* reference in the open-source ecosystem.
> 

Reviewer: Not sure it adds valuable information to make use of ModSecurity on Scalingo.
```suggestion
```

When enabled, ModSecurity analyzes every incoming HTTP request and compares

> the content of the request with a set of patterns. If there is a match, then it
> will simply run some actions, such as blocking the request, logging a message
> or returning a specific HTTP error.

Reviewer: We usually don't use future tense in documentation
```suggestion
the content of the request with a set of patterns. If there is a match, then it
simply runs some actions, such as blocking the request, logging a message
or returning a specific HTTP error.
```

ModSecurity implements its own Domain Specific Language, called *SecLang*,
making it easy for users to write and share their own rules (combination of
pattern and actions).

> For this first tutorial, we will use NGINX and the CRS provided by OWASP to
> deploy a WAF on Scalingo within minutes.

Reviewer: No future tense: you have many uses of the future tense in this doc, I would remove them
Nginx is spelled that way throughout the documentation. Can you update all `NGINX` occurrences with `Nginx`?

```suggestion
For this first tutorial, we use Nginx and the CRS provided by OWASP to
deploy a WAF on Scalingo within minutes.
```

## Deploying NGINX

The very first steps consist of deploying an NGINX application on Scalingo. To
do this, please [follow the dedicated tutorial]({% post_url platform/deployment/buildpacks/2000-01-01-nginx %}).

## Enabling ModSecurity

Once your NGINX application is successfully deployed, set the environment
variable `ENABLE_MODSECURITY` to `true`, either by adding it via
[your dashboard](https://dashboard.scalingo.com/) or by using the command line:

```bash

> $ scalingo --app $YOUR_APP_NAME env-set ENABLE_MODSECURITY=true

Reviewer: We use `my-app` as the app name everywhere in the doc
```suggestion
$ scalingo --app my-app env-set ENABLE_MODSECURITY=true
```

```

Trigger a new deployment of your application by creating an empty commit and
pushing it to your Scalingo remote:

```bash
$ git commit --allow-empty -m "Enable ModSecurity"
$ git push scalingo master
```

The empty commit is detected by Scalingo and picked up to re-deploy the

> application. Several additional actions will be done during this new
> deployment:
> 
> - ModSecurity and its dependencies will be installed.
> - Default configuration for ModSecurity will be enabled, which consists in
>   downloading and enabling the Core Rule Set (CRS) provided by OWASP.

Reviewer: niptick: no future tense
```suggestion
application. Several additional actions are done during this new deployment:

- ModSecurity and its dependencies are installed.
- Default configuration for ModSecurity is enabled. It downloads and enables the Core Rule Set (CRS) provided by OWASP.
```

Wait a few seconds for the deployment to finish and test that the CRS is
actually active by issuing the following command:

```bash

> $ curl -X INVALID_HTTP_METHOD https://$YOUR_APP_NAME.osc-fr1.scalingo.io -v

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ curl -v -X INVALID_HTTP_METHOD https://my-app.osc-fr1.scalingo.io
```

```

The application should respond with a **403 forbidden** such as the following:

```bash
> INVALID_HTTP_METHOD / HTTP/2

> > Host: $YOUR_APP_NAME.osc-fr1.scalingo.io

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Host: my-app.osc-fr1.scalingo.io
```

> User-Agent: curl/7.64.1
> Accept: */*
>
* Connection state changed (MAX_CONCURRENT_STREAMS == 128)!
< HTTP/2 403
< date: Tue, 31 May 2022 13:58:46 GMT
< content-type: text/html; charset=utf-8
< content-length: 146
< x-request-id: 343e6a24-640e-499a-9dfe-f5dbb636ef45
< strict-transport-security: max-age=31536000
<
<html>
<head><title>403 Forbidden</title></head>
<body>
<center><h1>403 Forbidden</h1></center>
<hr><center>nginx</center>
</body>
</html>
```

> ## Adding a custom rule

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Adding a Custom Rule
```

SecRule ARGS:param1 "@contains test" \
    "id:1234,\
    deny,\
    log,\
    status:403,\
    severity: 'CRITICAL',\
    tag: 'custom-rule',\
    msg: 'this is the log message you will see',\
    logdata: '%{MATCHED_VAR_NAME}=%{MATCHED_VAR}'"
```

{% note %}
- The `id:1234` is an arbitrary number, you can use any number < 100000 (see:
[https://coreruleset.org/docs/rules/ruleid/](https://coreruleset.org/docs/rules/ruleid/) for further details about `ruleid`).
- A list of all variables usable with `logdata` is available here:
[https://github.com/SpiderLabs/ModSecurity/wiki/Reference-Manual-(v3.x)#variables](https://github.com/SpiderLabs/ModSecurity/wiki/Reference-Manual-(v3.x)#variables)
{% endnote %}

Once done, we have to tell NGINX to load the brand new rules. Edit the file
you are using for your NGINX configuration (i.g. `nginx.conf`,
`nginx.conf.erb`, ...) and add two directives:

- `modsecurity`, which must be set to `on`, and that enables ModSecurity.
- `modsecurity_rules_file`, which must point to the file containing your rules.
  Since Scalingo deploys your app in `/app/`, this path **must** start with
  `/app/`.

Your file should end up like this:

```

> # This file is written in Nginx config language

Reviewer: nitpick: I don't really like abbreviated word in the documentation
```suggestion
# This file is written in Nginx configuration language
```

location / {
    modsecurity on;   # Enable ModSecurity on /
    modsecurity_rules_file /app/my_rules.conf;   # load custom rules file
    # (...)
    # The rest of your NGINX config file
}
```

You can now commit your changes and push them to your Scalingo remote, which
will trigger a new deployment of your WAF:

```bash
$ git add my_rules.conf
$ git add nginx.conf
$ git commit -m "Add modsecurity custom rules"
$ git push scalingo master
```

> ## Disabling a rule

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Disabling a Rule
```
